README.md, before:

esphome_i2c_sniffer — Passive I²C Bus Sniffer for ESPHome

    Passively captures and decodes I²C transactions on any two GPIO pins (SDA/SCL), no ACK/NACK interference.

    Works as an ESPHome external component; can be installed via external_components from a Git repository.

    Publishes each decoded I²C transaction as a text sensor (block format, e.g. [40563ms] [0x54]W+(10)+ | [0x54]R+(00)+(00)-).

    Also exposes optional sensors for the last seen address, last data frame length and last byte value.

    Offers a callback interface (on_address) for automations or advanced triggers.

    Logs every I²C message as ESPHome DEBUG log line.

Features

    Multi-block, combined transactions (Register-Read with repeated start) supported and merged into a single line.

    Timestamped output for bus analysis.

    Strictly passive: does not drive or disturb the bus.

    All code and comments are in English only; only code-relevant comments.

Typical use

    Sniff DDC/CI, EDID, EEPROM, or any generic I²C communication (e.g., between HDMI source and display, or microcontrollers).

How to use

    Add as a Git external component in ESPHome.

    external_components:
      - source: github://yourgithubuser/esphome-i2c-sniffer
        components: [ esphome_i2c_sniffer ]

    Configure the custom text sensor and (optionally) the two numeric sensors in your ESPHome YAML.

    esphome_i2c_sniffer:
      id: i2c_sniffer # Set Identifier Name - mandatory for ESPHome 2025.11
      sda_pin: 4 # GPIO4/D2 SDA I2C-Bus Data
      scl_pin: 5 # GPIO5/D1 SCL I2C-Bus Clock
      msg_sensor:
        name: "I2C Message"
      last_address_sensor:
        name: "I2C Last Address"
      last_data_sensor:
        name: "I2C Frame Length"
      last_byte_sensor:
        name: "I2C Last Byte Value"
      on_address:
        - lambda: |-
            // 'address' and 'rw' are available here automatically
            if (address == 0x40 && !rw) {
               ESP_LOGD("custom", "Write request detected on 0x40!");
            }




    Flash, then watch decoded I²C activity in Home Assistant and ESPHome logs.

Commit message:

Update README with HW requirements and ESP32 config
Added hardware requirement for ESP32 devices and updated configuration details in README.

README.md, after:

esphome_i2c_sniffer — Passive I²C Bus Sniffer for ESPHome

    Passively captures and decodes I²C transactions on any two GPIO pins (SDA/SCL), no ACK/NACK interference.

    Works as an ESPHome external component; can be installed via external_components from a Git repository.

    Publishes each decoded I²C transaction as a text sensor (block format, e.g. [40563ms] [0x54]W+(10)+ | [0x54]R+(00)+(00)-).

    Also exposes optional sensors for the last seen address, last data frame length and last byte value.

    Offers a callback interface (on_address) for automations or advanced triggers.

    Logs every I²C message as ESPHome DEBUG log line.

Features

    Multi-block, combined transactions (Register-Read with repeated start) supported and merged into a single line.

    Timestamped output for bus analysis.

    Strictly passive: does not drive or disturb the bus.

    All code and comments are in English only; only code-relevant comments.

Hardware Requirement
    
    The processing of the I2C signals requires sufficient processing power. Therefore ESP32 based devices have to be used.

Typical use

    Sniff DDC/CI, EDID, EEPROM, or any generic I²C communication (e.g., between HDMI source and display, or microcontrollers).

How to use

    Configure the ESP device in ESPHome: ONLY FOR ESP32 !!
    
    esp32:
      board: esp32dev
      framework:
        type: esp-idf #### Arduino framework is not Ok for ESP32 devices ####


    Add as a Git external component in ESPHome.

    external_components:
      - source: github://yourgithubuser/esphome-i2c-sniffer
        components: [ esphome_i2c_sniffer ]

    
    Configure the custom text sensor and (optionally) the two numeric sensors in your ESPHome YAML.

    esphome_i2c_sniffer:
      id: i2c_sniffer # Set Identifier Name - mandatory for ESPHome 2025.11
      sda_pin: 21 # GPIO21 SDA I2C-Bus Data / ESP32
      scl_pin: 22 # GPIO22 SCL I2C-Bus Clock / ESP32
      
      msg_sensor:
        name: "I2C Message"
      
      last_address_sensor:
        name: "I2C Last Address"
      
      last_data_sensor:
        name: "I2C Frame Length"
      
      last_byte_sensor:
        name: "I2C Last Byte Value"
      
      on_address:
        - lambda: |-
            // 'address' and 'rw' are available here automatically
            if (address == 0x40 && !rw) {
               ESP_LOGD("custom", "Write request detected on 0x40!");
            }




    Flash, then watch decoded I²C activity in Home Assistant and ESPHome logs.
